# How to write a preliminary statement?

The preliminary statement is an opportunity to make sure that we are all on the same page with respect to the project that you'll be working on. 

Write one page of what you understood from the preliminary discussions with me. I recommend using Google Docs, 

The statement should have a few parts

1. **Zooming in onto the problem**. Take for example physics in which we agreed that you're going to implement video search inside of the Zeeguu learning platform. The problem would start from a paragraph for a sentence explaining the challenge of learning new languages the importance of the problem because there's millions and millions of people who are faced with that challenge every day. It would then continue with observing that most of the tools for learning languages are based on artificial content textbooks Duolingo and put forward to question of could we learn language is based on real content that we find on the web. Would observe that zeeguu does this for text but he does not do it for video and also observe that many people these days prefer to watch a video then read an article on a given topic that's interesting to them so then you have arrived your problem that is something like." how my to design an interactive platform that would allow learners to find personally irrelevant and difficulty appropriate video materials for their learning new languages." 
3. **Describing a sketch of your solution**. What do you plan to implement? How are you going to evaluate your solution? In the example about a sketch of the solution will describe a plan to implement this feature inside of the zeeguu platform by modifying both the back and the front end correspondingly and to evaluate the usability and usefulness of the feature with a number of learners.
4. **Related work** is something that would also make the statement even stronger, but you will not always have time to write it at the time of the preliminary statement; you might have to work on it during the thesis itself.. However, if you do have the time, then writing a little bit about other similar solutions to this problem and observing what are some of the limitations of which one of those solutions would make the problem statement even more powerful. In the example above you could describe some other platform that also supports interactive videos for learners, but where the videos are sourced from a limited of predefined learning videos would allow you to highlight even more the originality of your solution; for example, the fact that you index daily new relevant videos makes your solution unique and necessary.  